Welcome to Merging of the Minds, the podcast that explores bleeding-edge technology and the subtle yet significant impacts it may have on your life.

Each deep dive episode will start with an editorial read followed by my own analysis and an exploration of how the technology may slowly but surely find its way into our lives.

Today, we're going to be talking about a new way to make jet fuel: from human waste.

That's right, you heard me correctly. Waste could soon be powering planes.

I know what you're probably thinking. That's pretty gross! But- hear me out.

This new technology could actually help us reduce our carbon footprint without having to go nuclear and make flying more sustainable.

On January 2nd, 2023, William Hunter of the Dailymail writes:

  It might sound dirty, but poo could soon make travelling by plane a lot cleaner.

  Researchers have found a way to convert human waste into usable jet fuel. 
  
  Gloucestershire-based Firefly Green Fuels says that its biofuel is chemically identical to jet fuel, but produces 92 per cent less carbon dioxide (CO2).
   
  And, with flying making up two per cent of global CO2 production, this may help cut out some big sources of pollution. 
  
  James Hygate, Firefly Green Fuels CEO, said: quote-We wanted to find a really low-value feedstock that was highly abundant. And of course poo is abundant.-end quote.
  
  To produce usable fuel from human waste, Firefly uses a method called hydrothermal liquefaction.
  
  This uses a combination of high pressure and heat to convert the final processed form of sewage called 'biosolids' into carbon-rich biochar and crude oil.
  
  This 'bio-crude' looks a lot like oil and even behaves chemically in the same way, meaning the scientists can extract kerosene from the fuel using fractional distillation.
   
  This involves evaporating the oil and collecting the fraction that condenses at a certain temperature. 
  
  Initial tests of the kerosene extracted show that it has a near-identical chemical composition to A1 fossil jet fuel. 
  
  The bio-kerosene is currently undergoing tests at the DLR Institute of Combustion Technology at the German Aerospace Center.
  
  The fuel will also be tested by the UK SAF (Sustainable Aviation Fuels) clearing House, based at the University of Sheffield.
  
  Mr Hygate calls his biofuel a 'fossil-free fuel' because, unlike conventional jet fuel, it does not come from crude oil. 
  
  So even though CO2 is still released when the fuel is burned, that carbon was originally trapped by the plants that go into the food we eat. 
  
  This means that biofuels contribute a smaller amount of net carbon emissions.
   
  quote-Of course energy would be used (in production), but when looking at the fuel's life cycle, a 90% saving is mind-blowing,-end quote Mr Hygate told the BBC.
  
  Poo, unlike the grains and plant oils used for other biofuels, is naturally abundant and is the one form of waste humans cannot stop producing. 
  
  Every day in the UK, the sewage system collects 11 billion litres of waste water which has to be treated at about 9,000 sewage treatment works. 
  
  However, the UK produces more sewage than its infrastructure can handle leading to millions of tonnes being dumped into rivers and the sea.
   
  Mr Hygate told MailOnline that processing sewage into fuel is a good alternative to other disposal methods.
  
  quote-Human waste is handled differently in different parts of the world, but no matter where it occurs it is a problematic and polluting waste with very few disposal routes,-end quote says Mr Hygate.
  
  quote-By using it as a feedstock to create SAF [sustainable aviation fuel] we're helping to clean up at both ends of the process.
  
  Lack of feedstock availability is a pressure keenly felt throughout the sustainable fuels industry, but sewage is a waste material that will realistically never run out.-end quote
  
  Firefly estimates that each person produces enough sewage each year to produce between four and five litres of jet fuel.
  
  To fly a passenger jet from London to New York - an eight-hour flight - would take the yearly sewage of approximately 10,000 people.
  
  That means if the waste of the entire UK population were converted into biofuel, this would supply about five per cent of the country's demand for aviation fuel.
  
  That might not seem like a huge amount, but Mr Hygate remains optimistic.
  
  quote-That's pretty exciting. There's a 10 per cent sustainable aviation fuel requirement, that's a legal mandate. And we could meet half of that with poo,-end quote he said. 
  
  However, Firefly Green Fuels says it has been in conversations with officials in Mumbai who believe they could power 80 per cent of flights from their international airport using jet fuel from sewage. 
  
  Mr Hygate told MailOnline they could not provide a definitive price for the new fuel but says that 'current indications are that the cost of our fuel should be competitive with other routes to SAF.
  
  quote-What nobody wants to see is the transition to SAF leading to a huge cost impact on passengers. Thankfully we don't foresee this happening as robust incentives and supports are in place.-end quote
  
  As countries and corporations alike look to reduce their carbon footprint, aviation has remained stubbornly difficult to clean up. 
  
  Modern aircraft require huge amounts of fuel to produce the energy for international flights.
  
  A plane like the Boeing 747 uses about 150,000 litres of fuel during a ten-hour flight. 
  
  Earlier this year, Virgin Atlantic completed the first ever transatlantic flight powered entirely by sustainable aviation fuel.
  
  The Boeing 787 used 70 tonnes of fuel made from waste oils and animal fats to travel from London to New York. 
  
  However, this was a one-off event and there are currently no plans to replace fossil fuels in flight. 
  
  There are also attempts to replace fossil fuels entirely by moving towards electric planes. 
  
  In 2022, the world's first electric passenger plane reached 3,500 ft for the first time.
  
  Eviation Aircraft, who produced the nine-seat plane, say it is set  to carry regional commuters and cargo.  

Okay, so let's unpack this a bit.

So, Firefly Green Fuels has developed a process called hydrothermal liquefaction that converts sewage into bio-crude, a substance chemically similar to fossil jet fuel.

This bio-crude is then refined into bio-kerosene using a process called fractional distillation.

Imagine you are making sandcastles on the beach.

You take a big bucket of sand and build a tall tower with turrets and moats.

But what if your sandcastle could keep going, smaller and smaller, with even tinier turrets and moats, all the way down to the tiniest grain of sand?

That's kind of like fractal distillation.

Fractal distillation is a special way of separating different things mixed together, a bit like how you might sift sand and pebbles to get them apart.

One distilled, tests show that the bio-kerosene created by Firefly Green Fuels has a near-identical composition to A1 fossil jet fuel.

I imagine this means existing aircrafts would not need to be modified too signficantly to use the biofuel, but something in the math of this article seemed a bit off. 

If a Boeing 757 uses 150,000 liters, basically 150 tons, of fossil fuel for a ten hour flight, then it is rather impressive the same aircraft only took 70 tons of biofuel to fly from London to New York, an 8 hour 15 minute flight, as reported by Virgin Atlantic.

That is quite nearly twice the fuel efficiency of biofuels than fossil fuels.

And if the CO2 emissions of burning Firefly biofuel really are 92% less compared to conventional fuel and completely renewable, why are we not using biofuels to power everything?

Well breaking the status quo in major commercial operations not only takes time but has to be practical and affordable.

A breakthroughs like this probably could not have happened until concerns about climate change were taken seriously enough by governments to fund them.

Then it takes years of research to discover new ways to produce biofuels, let alone a biofuel that is both highly renewable, cheap, and practical for commericial adoption.

Assuming the cost to produce Firefly's biofuel can be driven down, I do forsee a near future where we will slowly transition to aircrafts powered by a hybrid of fossil and biofuel.

Even if some environment conscious investors take on the risk, it would take years to commericialze and require partnerships with specific airlines aiming to make their brand the green pioneer.

As for electric, the sheer weight of batteries and their potential to overheat or explode are major reasons for why electric aircrafts may not actually be a feasible competitor to biofuels until the next paradigm shift in batteries.

So if you are very energy self-aware, you may soon be able to fly completely at ease, knowing that you are not contributing to the problem of climate change.

It is also worth noting, in case you were worried, that although manure has a less than pleasant smell to most, the burning of biofuels made from waste often have an oddly sweet and woody aroma due to its organic composition.

I am your host Tom, and that's all for today's episode on fuel made from waste. 

Make sure to leave us a like if you enjoyed listening and you can follow or subscribe to get notifications when new episodes come out.

Know anyone who might find this interesting or wild, don't hesitate to share the knowledge.

We hope you learned something new today, and until next time, peace.
